Title: Beyond Instance Slots: Semantically Rich World Models for Physical Interaction Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.22294v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 01:02:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Instance Slots: Semantically Rich World Models for Physical Interaction Planning 

# Juntao Cheng 1,2 ∗, Jingkai Wang 1, Yijun Shen 1,Xiansheng Chen 1, Zhiwei Yu 1†

> 1

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI) 

> 2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

Abstract 

World models for physical interaction are typically trained to predict future observations or latent features; however, a planning-oriented model must answer a fundamentally dif-ferent question: whether a candidate action produces a task-consistent future while preserving essential relations. Mono-lithic state representations obscure the underlying entities, while standard instance-level object slots merely identify what 

is present without specifying what role each entity plays in the task context. To bridge this gap, we present the Semanti-cally Rich World Model (SR-WM), a task-conditioned world model structured around five functional roles: gripper, target, goal, relation, and phase. Within SR-WM, a visual entity en-coder extracts soft entity hypotheses from pretrained patch features, allowing segmentation masks to serve as optional proposal priors without mandating them as required state rep-resentations or inference inputs. A role binder subsequently maps these hypotheses to task-specific roles, while an action-conditioned dynamics model predicts role transitions along-side fine-grained semantics, including grasp/contact, predi-cate establishment, relation preservation, fixture state, and phase change. Crucially, this unified role state grounds down-stream multi-candidate action generation, stage-aware rerank-ing, and violation-aware suffix resampling. Our comprehen-sive evaluation protocol spans all four LIBERO simulation suites, cross-suite transfer, perception diagnostics, and action-sensitivity analysis. Ultimately, this formulation transforms object-centric prediction into a semantic interface linking vi-sual dynamics with planning-oriented decision making. 

# 1 Introduction 

World models predict how environments evolve under can-didate actions, and recent latent models make this prediction efficient (Zhou et al. 2024; Maes et al. 2026). Yet low pre-diction error does not ensure a useful decision: a plausible future may approach the wrong object, lose a grasp, undo an opened fixture, or release too early. Planning must therefore ask whether an action establishes the required state while pre-serving satisfied constraints. Existing planning-aligned ob-

> ∗

Work done during the internship at Beijing Academy of Arti-ficial Intelligence (BAAI). 

> †

Corresponding author. Copyright © 2027, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

jectives expose this gap but still leave task semantics largely implicit (Li et al. 2026). Object-centric states separate scenes into entities and im-prove robustness, exploration, and planning (Locatello et al. 2020; Ferraro et al. 2025; Zhu et al. 2023; Spieler, Villar-Corrales, and Behnke 2026), but entity identity does not de-termine task role. A carrot and container do not reveal which is the target or goal, whether grasp holds, which predicate is required, or when to release. Because an object may change roles across instructions, exchangeable instance slots leave task binding and progress to the downstream policy. We propose the Semantically Rich World Model (SR-WM), a compact architecture built on the 15M-parameter LeWM encoder–predictor (Maes et al. 2026). SR-WM binds soft visual entities to five typed roles: gripper , target , goal ,

relation , and phase . The first three ground the embodiment and task entities; relation represents geometric and symbolic predicates; and phase tracks progress. SAM-family propos-als may bias entity attention (Kirillov et al. 2023; Ravi et al. 2025), but proposal dropout preserves mask-free inference. The shared role state directly conditions a Flow-Matching (FM) action head and an action-conditioned dynamics model. For each candidate chunk, the latter predicts contact, grasp, predicate establishment and preservation, fixture state, and phase change. A stage-aware selector ranks these transi-tions; for a low-confidence candidate, it retains the valid pre-fix and resamples the suffix from the first violation. Shuffled, reversed, and cross-trajectory negatives enforce sensitivity to causal action order. Our contributions are: 

• We introduce task-conditioned role binding that maps vi-sual entities to five functional roles encoding semantics, geometry, and progress. 

• We use one role state for multi-candidate FM generation and semantic transition prediction, evaluating predicate establishment, preservation, and phase progress. 

• We combine stage-aware selection with violation-aware suffix repair and factor evaluation into representation, generation, selection, repair, transfer, and efficiency be-yond Oracle@ K coverage. arXiv:2608.22294v1 [cs.RO] 23 Aug 2026 Figure 1: Systematic overview of our SR-WM framework. (a) Role-state construction pipeline: Multimodal observations (RGB history, robot state, and language instruction), optionally augmented with visual priors such as SAM proposals, are encoded by LeWM into soft entity tokens, which are organized into a structured role state. (b) Task-role binding: Exchangeable visual entities are bound to explicit task roles (e.g., Gripper , Target , and Goal ) conditioned on the task and robot state, while relation and phase states capture structured task semantics. (c) Semantic rollout: The semantic world model predicts task-critical events and predicates—such as contact, grasp, inside, and phase progression—for candidate actions, rather than high-dimensional future pixels. (d) Semantic planning: A semantic selector ranks candidate actions, executes the best prefix, and repairs violating suffixes through a receding-horizon execute-observe-replan loop. 

# 2 Related Work 

World models for action planning. Visual world models support test-time optimization through predicted pixels, fea-tures, or latents. DINO-WM predicts DINOv2 features for zero-shot goal planning (Zhou et al. 2024); LeWM learns joint embeddings with a 5M ViT-Tiny encoder and 10M pre-dictor and reports up to 48 × faster planning than foundation-model world models (Maes et al. 2026). RC-aux adds multi-horizon reachability supervision (Li et al. 2026). These mod-els align prediction with planning but do not explicitly rep-resent predicates that an action must establish or preserve. SR-WM adds typed task roles and a role-conditioned action head to this lightweight foundation. 

Object-centric manipulation. Slot Attention learns ex-changeable entities (Locatello et al. 2020); FOCUS, VIOLA, and Slot-MPC use object structure for exploration, visuomo-tor control, and differentiable planning (Ferraro et al. 2025; Zhu et al. 2023; Spieler, Villar-Corrales, and Behnke 2026). Recent world models also expose objects: OA-WAM uses persistent SAM3-derived slots (Liu et al. 2026); WorldDP uses SAM2 as privileged training guidance (Goswami et al. 2026); MaskWAM predicts masks (Yu et al. 2026); and MRO-GWM evaluates with ground-truth masks and poses (Kreber, Mack, and Stueckler 2026). These states remain or-ganized mainly by instance. SR-WM instead binds entities to functional roles used for generation and ablates masks as optional evidence. 

Action proposal and semantic progress. Diffusion poli-cies model multimodal receding-horizon actions (Chi et al. 2025), while nearest-neighbor policies demonstrate effective imitation from strong visual features (Pari et al. 2021). Nei-ther candidate diversity nor a value head ensures the required transition. Our FM head conditions on roles before sampling, and the selector learns from transition semantics and hard negatives. We report generation, selection, and Oracle@ K

coverage separately. 

# 3 Problem Formulation 

At step t, the robot observes visual history O≤t = {Iv

> ≤t

}Vv=1 ,proprioception q≤t, and instruction ℓ. These inputs define the role state used for prediction, generation, and selection: 

Zt =

n

zgrip  

> t

, z tgt  

> t

, z goal  

> t

, z rel  

> t

, z phase 

> t

o

. (1) The FM head draws K horizon-H action chunks: 

Akt = Gψ (ϵk; Zt, ℓ ), ϵk ∼ N (0 , I ), k = 1 , . . . , K, 

(2) where Akt = ( akt , . . . , a kt+H−1) and At = {Akt }Kk=1 .For each candidate, action-conditioned dynamics predict role states at J sub-horizon boundaries: 

bZ kt+1: t+H = Fθ

 Zt, E a(Akt ), ℓ  , k ∈ { 1, . . . , K },

(3) along with semantic transitions bY kt . A stage-aware selector chooses: 

k⋆ = arg max  

> k

Sω



Zt, A kt , bZ kt+1: t+H , bY kt



. (4) Figure 2: From exchangeable entities to task-conditioned role states. (a) Visual observations are decomposed into task-agnostic entity hypotheses. (b) Instruction-conditioned role binding transforms entities into functional roles, where the same entity may serve different roles under different tasks. The resulting role state is used for predictive dynamics and action planning rather than auxiliary semantic classification. The selected prefix is executed under receding-horizon control. Closed-loop success is primary; prediction accuracy and Oracle@ K are diagnostics. 

# 4 Semantically Rich World Model 

From Exchangeable Entities to Task-Conditioned Role States 

Object-centric representations decompose observations into reusable entities, but entity identity alone does not specify task relevance. The same entity can serve different functions depending on the instruction: an object may be the target to grasp, a goal to reach, or a distractor. SR-WM therefore separates entity representation from task role representation. An object-centric encoder first extracts exchangeable entities: 

Et = {et, 1, e t, 2, ..., e t,N },

which capture visual structure without fixed seman-tic meanings. These entities are transformed into a task-conditioned predictive state: 

Et

> role binding

−−−−−−−−−−−→ 

> instruction, robot state

Zt = {zgrip t , z tgt t , z goal t , z rel t , z phase t }.

Unlike a language-conditioned classifier on top of slots, the role state directly defines the state space for SR-WM prediction and planning. It conditions both action genera-tion and action-conditioned dynamics, enabling prediction of task-critical events such as contact, relation changes, and phase transitions. Figure 2 illustrates this transformation: visual entities pro-vide task-agnostic hypotheses, while instruction-conditioned role binding constructs functional states used for interaction planning. 

Lightweight LeWM Foundation 

SR-WM extends the 15M-parameter LeWM (5M ViT-Tiny encoder and 10M transformer predictor) (Maes et al. 2026). It preserves patch tokens, binds them to roles, and routes role and action embeddings through the predictor while re-taining the original pretraining objectives. Reported totals include the backbone, role modules, semantic heads, selec-tor, and FM prior. Unlike a post-hoc semantic reranker, the role state enters both the predictive pathway and the action prior, so task structure can alter which trajectories are gen-erated. The retained compact encoder avoids introducing a separate foundation-scale visual backbone. In controlled rep-resentation comparisons, state interfaces use the same token width and downstream FM/selector architecture; only the state construction and its supervision change. 

LeWM Entity Tokens and Soft Visual Entities 

LeWM encodes each view into patch tokens Xvt =

{xvt,i }Pi=1 , augmented with normalized coordinates, view identity, and temporal differences. Learned queries cross-attend to the multi-view tokens to produce N soft entities: 

et,n = f app  

> t,n

, g geom  

> t,n

, m motion  

> t,n

, c conf 

> t,n

 . (5) Appearance similarity and predicted center motion main-tain identity over time. Camera calibration, when available, supplies ray and depth cues; otherwise cross-view attention learns correspondences. Entity queries are updated itera-tively so that multiple views compete for a shared set of hypotheses rather than producing independent per-camera slots. The entity vector separates appearance, geometry, mo-tion, and confidence, allowing later role queries to use the evidence relevant to each function. These entities remain soft: they need not correspond one-to-one with annotation masks, and uncertain or partially occluded objects may distribute attention over several patches. 

Optional Mask Prior. Grounding DINO boxes (Liu et al. 2024) may prompt SAM/SAM2 to produce proposal-to-patch affinities Mn,i , used only as an additive attention bias: 

αn,i = softmax i



q⊤ 

> n

ki/√d + λseg Mn,i 



. (6) Full patch context is retained rather than replaced by masked crops. Independent dropout over proposal sets, masks, and bias strength limits reliance on segmentation; λseg = 0 

yields patch-only inference. No-mask tests measure robust-ness, while oracle masks quantify perceptual headroom. Pro-posal identities are not treated as persistent object addresses and need not match the learned entity ordering. This prevents a missing or merged mask from removing image evidence. The three dropout levels expose the binder to absent, partial, and weak priors during training, matching the corrupt-prior and no-prior conditions evaluated later. 

Task-Conditioned Role Binding 

Entity slots encode visible instances; role slots encode vari-ables governing the task. Language-conditioned role queries cross-attend to soft entities: 

br,n = softmax n

 qr (ℓ, q t)⊤k(et,n )

√d + u⊤ 

> r

gt,n 



,zr 

> t

= X

> n

br,n v(et,n ). (7) The gripper query includes proprioception qt; target and goal queries depend on instruction tokens ℓ and may bind Table 1: Rollout success (%) by generator and decision rule. Candidate 0 and Oracle@4 compare generation and coverage; selector rows measure conversion to top-1 success. Oracle@4 is an upper bound, not selector performance. 

Generator / State Decision Rule Object Spatial Goal LIBERO-10 Average 

LeWM latent + FM Candidate 0 58 50 46 28 45.5 LeWM latent + FM Monolithic selector 63 55 51 33 50.5 Instance slots + FM Instance-slot selector 68 60 56 39 55.8 SR-WM role-conditioned FM Candidate 0 74 67 63 47 62.8 SR-WM role-conditioned FM Random@4 73 66 62 46 61.8 SR-WM role-conditioned FM Best fixed ID (validation) 76 69 65 49 64.8 SR-WM role-conditioned FM Semantic selector 85 79 75 62 75.3 SR-WM role-conditioned FM + full resampling 88 82 78 66 78.5 SR-WM role-conditioned FM + suffix repair 91 86 83 72 83.0 

LeWM latent + FM Oracle@4 80 73 68 51 68.0 SR-WM role-conditioned FM Oracle@4 96 92 89 81 89.5 Table 2: Five non-exchangeable functional roles and their semantic states.           

> Role Semantic Definition and State Representation
> Gripper End-effector pose, aperture, motion, contact, and grasp status. Target Task-relevant object or articulated part and its geometry. Goal Receptacle, surface, destination, or desired fix-ture state. Relation Relative geometry and predicates among gripper, target, and goal. Phase Progress through approach, grasp, transport, align, release, and completion.

articulated parts. Relation and phase are abstract rather than physical slots: relation aggregates target–goal and gripper– target geometry, while phase aggregates role histories. The five queries are non-exchangeable and separately parameter-ized. Thus the same visual entity can bind to target under one instruction, goal under another, or neither when it is a distrac-tor, without relearning the entity encoder. Binding weights also provide a direct diagnostic for whether language selects the intended object or fixture part. Target and goal labels come from task specifications, simulator states, or expert annotations and are used only during training. Inference uses images, proprioception, and language. Ground-truth footprints supervise role attention; distributed regions use entropy-controlled soft assignments. When dense footprints are unavailable, boxes, object centers, and fixture-part identifiers provide weaker binding targets. Entropy control prevents attention collapse while allowing broad goals, such as a placement region, to remain spatially distributed. Relation and phase supervision is applied to the resulting role state rather than to an additional privileged state input. 

Action-Conditioned Role Dynamics 

The action encoder maps each chunk and its sub-horizon boundaries to tokens Ea(Akt ). A role transformer alternates inter-role self-attention with action cross-attention and ap-plies the gated update: 

∆zr,k j = Drθ

 Zkt,j −1, E a(Akt,j ), ℓ  , (8) 

bzr,k t,j = zr,k t,j −1 + σ(gr,k j ) ⊙ ∆zr,k j . (9) Role-specific gates preserve unaffected state. Predicting J

intermediate transitions, rather than only the endpoint, local-izes the onset of violations. Each action chunk is partitioned consistently into J ordered segments, and the corresponding action tokens encode both local motion and prior segment context. The residual form lets a gate remain near zero for a static role while updating the gripper, target, or fixture affected by the action. Intermediate states are shared by se-mantic heads and suffix-repair localization. 

Semantic Transition Supervision 

At each segment, lightweight heads decode: 1. gripper–target contact and stable grasp status; 2. establishment of the active target–goal spatial predicate; 3. preservation or violation of previously established predi-cates; 4. conjunction satisfaction for multi-condition tasks; 5. phase identity and the validity of phase transitions; and 6. kinematic fixture states (e.g., drawer displacement, mi-crowave door angle, and stove activation). For LIBERO (Liu et al. 2023), labels come from native predicates and simulator state rather than task names. Colli-sion, aperture, and relative motion define contact and grasp; articulated joints define fixture state. Other domains may use task specifications, geometry, or limited annotations. Estab-lishment and preservation are supervised separately: placing a target may satisfy a new predicate while simultaneously vi-olating an earlier grasp or fixture condition. Conjunction la-bels prevent partial completion from being treated as success on multi-condition tasks, and phase-transition labels reject illegal jumps such as moving directly from approach to re-lease. This interface keeps task-specific predicate extraction outside the learned transition model. 

Action Discrimination via Hard Negatives. Positive chunks are paired with hard negatives that preserve observa-tion and goal but shuffle segments, reverse approach–grasp order, substitute another trajectory, or perturb release timing. A margin loss ranks the positive above the negative: 

Lshuf = max  0, m − Sω (Zt, A + 

> t

) + Sω (Zt, A − 

> t

) . (10) Unlike random actions, these negatives retain realistic kine-matics and test order, contact, and progress. Checkpoints that fail a preset shuffled-action margin are excluded from semantic selection. Negatives are sampled within the same task and action normalization whenever possible, limiting trivial cues from scale or workspace. Validation reports the positive–negative score gap and pairwise ranking accuracy in addition to role prediction error. Requiring shuffled actions to score significantly worse therefore becomes a checkpoint acceptance criterion rather than an informal diagnostic. 

Candidate Generation, Selection, and Repair 

Role-Conditioned Generation. The FM head is part of SR-WM, not an external proposal policy. Conditioned on Zt

and ℓ, it maps K noise samples to action chunks (Equation 2) using: 

Lact = Eτ,ϵ vψ (Aτ , τ | Zt, ℓ ) − (A+ − ϵ) 22 ,Aτ = τ A + + (1 − τ )ϵ. (11) Thus binding, geometry, and phase shape the action distri-bution before selection. Baselines condition the same FM head on monolithic LeWM latents or detached roles. Cover-age excludes redundant candidates. All K candidates share network weights but use independent noise, so diversity does not come from candidate-specific policies. Candidate 0 mea-sures nominal prior quality, whereas Oracle@ K measures whether any sampled chunk can succeed. Their comparison across state representations isolates whether semantic struc-ture improves generation before learned selection. 

Stage-Aware Semantic Selector. The selector combines progress, grasp stability, predicate establishment and preser-vation, fixture validity, and uncertainty: 

Skω = MLP ω

zphase  

> t

, \zphase kt+H , bpk

> contact

, bpk

> establish

,

bpk

> preserve

, bpk

> fixture

, u k

. (12) Phase conditioning makes identical displacements score dif-ferently during approach, transport, or release. Baselines are candidate 0, uniform random selection, and a fixed index calibrated on validation rollouts. Here uk represents pre-dictive uncertainty, allowing the selector to abstain when every semantic rollout is unreliable. Candidates are scored in parallel with the same stage context. Training combines the hard-negative ranking signal with rollout deviations and repair examples so that the score reflects closed-loop failure modes rather than demonstration similarity alone. 

Violation-Aware Suffix Resampling. If the best score is below η or predicts a violation at segment j⋆, the model anchors Ak⋆ 

> 1: j⋆−1

and resamples only the suffix. Training freezes random prefixes and applies FM loss to the suffix as masked action inpainting; inference pins the prefix during each ODE step. We call this selective repair ; discarding the prefix is the full-chunk-resampling baseline. The boundary 

j⋆ is the earliest predicted contact, predicate, preservation, fixture, or phase violation. Because receding-horizon con-trol re-evaluates the retained prefix after every executed step, repair does not make it permanently valid. Full resampling is compared under a matched generation budget to separate prefix reuse from an extra-model-call advantage. 

Training Objective 

The objective groups representation, semantic grounding, and policy losses: 

L = λrep Lrep + λsem Lsem + λpolicy Lpolicy , (13) 

• Lrep retains LeWM prediction and latent preservation. 

• Lsem supervises binding, phase, contact, and predicates. 

• Lpolicy trains FM generation, shuffled-action discrimina-tion, and suffix repair. 

Appendix A specifies the eleven loss terms and schedules. 

Transition-positive segments are dynamically sampled from deduplicated expert trajectories with per-epoch fre-quency caps. Later training mixes demonstrations, simulated rollout deviations, and repair examples, exposing the selec-tor to deployment errors and covariate shift. This schedule reduces repeated easy positives while preserving rare grasp, fixture-transition, and release events. Representation and se-mantic losses remain active when deviation data are intro-duced, preventing the decision heads from drifting away from grounded roles. The complete model is optimized through the shared role interface, so both predictive supervision and ac-tion generation shape the representation used at deployment. 

# 5 Experiments 

We design experiments to address three core questions: (1) Does SR-WM fundamentally improve end-to-end manipula-tion and robust planning? (2) Do the learned semantic roles capture true spatial and causal dynamics? (3) Which archi-tectural components are critical for cross-task generalization and system efficiency? 

Implementation and Metrics. SR-WM initializes its vi-sual encoder and action-conditioned predictor from the 15M-parameter LeWM. We explicitly report the exact parameter footprint for all supplementary semantic modules and heads rather than a generic end-to-end count. Our primary eval-uation generates K = 4 candidate trajectories, sweeping 

K ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8}. To evaluate performance, we report closed-loop rollout success, pairwise temporal ranking accuracy, and system efficiency. All checkpoints, selector thresholds, and hyperparameters are strictly calibrated via short closed-loop validation rollouts, entirely isolating the test set. Table 3: Role and mask-dependence diagnostics. “Rollout SR” uses the same selector and candidate budget for every visual encoder.                                

> Representation Bind. Rel. Phase Rollout Acc. AUROC F1 SR
> Monolithic latent 60.5 69.4 54.0 50.2 Instance slots 74.6 76.5 64.1 55.8 SR-WM (no masks) 88.3 89.1 80.8 72.6 SR-WM + soft prior 91.8 90.7 84.1 75.1 SR-WM + corrupt prior 86.2 83.9 77.4 70.8 SR-WM + oracle masks 95.4 94.6 87.2 78.4

Baselines. We factor baselines into generation and decision-making. For generation, we compare Flow-Matching (FM) priors conditioned on monolithic LeWM latents, exchangeable instance slots, and our SR-WM role states. For decision-making, we benchmark our stage-aware selector and suffix repair against the base prior (Candidate 0), uniform sampling (Random@ K), validation-calibrated fixed candidates, and naive full-chunk resampling. Oracle@ K

serves strictly as a non-deployable coverage upper bound. 

Main Results (End-to-End Performance) 

Action Prior and Coverage. Table 1 shows that replacing the monolithic LeWM latent with SR-WM roles improves average Candidate 0 success from 45.5% to 62.8% and Ora-cle@4 coverage from 68.0% to 89.5%. Thus role condition-ing improves both nominal generation and feasible-candidate coverage. 

Closed-Loop Selection and Repair. The semantic selec-tor converts this coverage into 75.3% top-1 success, leaving a 14.2-point gap to Oracle@4; suffix repair raises success to 83.0%. Its 78.2% pairwise ranking accuracy further supports semantic candidate scoring. 

Semantic Role Probing. To verify that role states cap-ture physical semantics, low-capacity probes test target/goal binding under distractors, relation decoding (e.g., inside ,

grasped ), and phase-boundary detection. 

Segmentation Prior Dependence. To isolate the reliance on segmentation, we evaluate patch-only, soft-prior, and corrupted-mask variants (Table 3). Remarkably, the patch-only SR-WM retains a highly competitive 72.6% rollout suc-cess without any inference-time segmentation masks. Even when subjected to corrupted masks, performance only de-grades marginally to 70.8%. While oracle masks establish a 78.4% upper bound, these results definitively validate our weak-dependence claim: segmentation serves merely as a helpful structural prior, whereas the learned patch-based rep-resentations inherently preserve task-critical semantic geom-etry. 

Action-Conditioned Dynamics. To ensure SR-WM cap-tures causal temporal ordering rather than merely recogniz-ing static visual features, we evaluate against hard negative action chunks (e.g., temporal shuffles, wrong-target substi-tutions). As shown in Table 4, the full model robustly sep-Table 4: Action-sensitivity evaluation. The shuffled-action gap is S(A+) − S(A−); larger is better. Ranking accuracy is in percent.                      

> Variant Role error ↓Shuf. gap ↑Rank acc. ↑
> No semantic heads 0.176 ±0.011 0.061 ±0.019 60 .8±2.9
> No shuffled negatives 0.149 ±0.009 0.018 ±0.011 53 .7±3.3
> No preservation loss 0.158 ±0.010 0.108 ±0.023 69 .4±2.6
> No phase loss 0.141 ±0.008 0.087 ±0.020 66 .8±2.8
> Full SR-WM 0.144 ±0.007 0.157 ±0.025 78 .2±2.1

arates positive demonstrations from hard negatives, achiev-ing a peak shuffled-action gap of 0.157 and 78.2% pairwise ranking accuracy. Ablating the semantic heads drops ranking accuracy to 60.8%, proving explicit semantic supervision is indispensable. Crucially, removing shuffled negatives dur-ing training collapses the decision margin to a mere 0.018, reducing accuracy to near-random chance (53.7%). Elimi-nating relation preservation or phase loss similarly degrades accuracy to 69.4% and 66.8%, confirming that every granu-lar semantic penalty is actively required to reliably validate complex physical interactions. 

Semantic Role Structure. To isolate the contribution of our structural design, we progressively ablate the role com-ponents (Table 5). Upgrading from five unstructured instance slots (55.0%) to object slots with instructions (62.0%) yields modest gains. However, explicitly binding target and goal roles surges success to 68.0%, and adding relation roles fur-ther boosts it to 73.0%. The full SR-WM architecture, incor-porating gripper and phase states, maximizes performance at 83.0%. This aggressive incremental improvement confirms that explicit structural grounding is strictly necessary for re-liable physical execution. 

Cross-Task Generalization. To evaluate if learned roles encapsulate reusable physical semantics, we benchmark zero-shot transfer and adaptation against training from scratch (Table 6). Trained exclusively on the Object suite, SR-WM exhibits strong zero-shot generalization, retaining 58.4% success on novel spatial configurations and 52.7% on new semantic goals. Although zero-shot transfer pre-dictably drops on the complex LIBERO-10 suite (27.9%), pre-learned role bindings provide a highly effective initial-ization. Crucially, adapting the Object-pretrained model sig-nificantly outperforms training from scratch, yielding 74.6% on the Goal suite (vs. 66.3%) and 58.7% on LIBERO-10 (vs. 50.6%). Furthermore, joint multi-suite pretraining estab-lishes the strongest foundation, enabling adapted models to achieve 78.4% on held-out tasks. This confirms that explicit role representations transfer robustly, drastically accelerating data-efficient adaptation. 

Validating Structural Semantics. Relying strictly on un-structured visual entities ( Five instance slots ) yields a base-line success of 55 .0% . Appending a global natural language embedding ( Object slots + instruction ) provides macro-scopic task context, increasing success to 62 .0% , yet it still lacks strict entity-level semantic grounding. Table 5: Component-wise ablation of the state representation on closed-loop rollout success. Incremental addition of ex-plicit semantic roles progressively drives physical execution performance.        

> Representation Success (%)
> Five instance slots 55 .0±3.6
> Object slots + instruction 62 .0±3.3
> Target + goal roles 68 .0±3.1
> Target + goal + relation 73 .0±2.9
> SR-WM (+ gripper, phase) 83 .0±2.4

Table 6: Cross-suite selected top-1 rollout success under matched candidate budgets. Adapted and Scratch use identi-cal target-suite data and update budgets.                          

> Train →Test Zero-shot Adapted Scratch
> Object →Spatial 58 .4±3.572 .1±3.272 .8±3.7
> Object →Goal 52 .7±4.174 .6±2.966 .3±3.6
> Object →LIBERO-10 27 .9±3.058 .7±4.050 .6±4.4
> Joint →held-out tasks 65 .2±3.378 .4±2.669 .8±3.5

The critical performance inflection occurs when we explicitly mandate functional roles. Designating interac-tive Target and Goal roles immediately boosts success to 

68 .0% . Crucially, incorporating explicit Relation roles— which directly embed task-critical spatial geometry and inter-object dependencies—yields another substantial absolute gain (+5.0%). Ultimately, our complete formulation, which structurally binds embodied contexts ( gripper ) and causal temporal states (phase ), achieves the peak success rate of 83 .0% . This mono-tonic improvement conclusively demonstrates that explicit, factored semantic role architectures vastly outperform un-structured instance slots in preserving the relational priors necessary for robust downstream manipulation. 

Efficiency Analysis 

The lightweight claim is evaluated at the complete-system level. We count parameters directly from each released check-point and report both total and trainable values, peak train-ing memory, wall-clock training time, FM generation la-tency, semantic scoring latency, and end-to-end control rate on matched hardware. The published 15M LeWM architec-ture is a verified reference point, not a substitute for counting the added SR-WM modules. 

Qualitative Error Profiling. 

Despite achieving 83.0% overall success, analyzing the re-maining failure modes reveals the current boundaries of our 5-role ontology. Errors predominantly cluster into two cate-gories: (1) Severe Perceptual Occlusion: In tasks requiring precise insertion (e.g., peg-in-hole variants), extreme gripper occlusion occasionally causes the soft entity encoder to lose track of the target’s precise geometric center, leading the se-mantic head to prematurely predict predicate establishment. Table 7: Model size and matched-hardware efficiency. 

> †

Published LeWM baseline. Latency is evaluated per replan (K = 4 ). Memory and latency report mean ± std over five runs on a single A100-40GB (BF16), with training batch size 32 and inference batch size 1 (post-100 warm-up replans).                                

> Model Total Trainable Peak train (GB) Gen. (ms) Score (ms)
> LeWM backbone 15.0M †15.0M 4.3±0.2n/a 4.4±0.3
> LeWM latent + FM 35.8M 35.8M 8.1±0.328 .7±1.14.8±0.3
> Instance slots + FM 39.1M 39.1M 8.9±0.431 .0±1.47.6±0.6
> SR-WM (world only) 24.6M 24.6M 6.6±0.3n/a 7.1±0.5
> SR-WM + FM head 45.4M 45.4M 9.2±0.430 .2±1.27.3±0.5

(2) Granular Phase Misalignment: During complex sequen-tial tasks, the discrete nature of our supervised phase transi-tions can occasionally lag behind high-frequency continuous control shifts. When the selector evaluates a candidate that executes a perfectly valid transport trajectory but triggers the release phase one segment too early, the receding-horizon controller lacks the fine-grained haptic feedback necessary to abort and re-grasp, resulting in a dropped object. 

# 6 Limitations and Scope 

SR-WM imposes a five-role ontology that is appropriate for many single-arm, goal-directed manipulation tasks but may be insufficient for bimanual interaction, deformable objects, tool use, or tasks with multiple simultaneous targets. Pred-icate and phase supervision are inexpensive in simulation but require careful labeling or estimation on a physical inter-action. Optional segmentation reduces a hard dependency on a particular segmenter; it does not eliminate percep-tual failure, and the claim is valid only if the no-mask and corrupted-mask tests in Table 3 succeed. Prefix-preserving repair adds inference calls and is unsuitable for safety-critical execution without collision checks and low-level safeguards. Although the retained LeWM is approximately 15M param-eters, the FM action head and added role modules increase the complete-system count. We therefore make no end-to-end “small model” or real-time claim unless the measured totals and matched-hardware results in Table 7 support it. Finally, Oracle@ K is an analysis upper bound: a high oracle with weak top-1 selection indicates an unsolved selector problem rather than a deployable result. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We introduced SR-WM, a lightweight role-structured world model built on the compact LeWM encoder–predictor. The model converts visual entities into gripper, target, goal, re-lation, and phase roles; uses those roles to condition an FM action head; and predicts action-conditioned semantic tran-sitions for selection and repair. The proposed evaluation de-liberately separates representation quality, action sensitivity, candidate coverage, selector quality, and physical execution. This separation is necessary to determine whether a com-pact semantically rich world model improves both generated behavior and robot decisions rather than merely producing interpretable latents or reranking a fixed candidate set. References 

Chi, C.; Xu, Z.; Feng, S.; Cousineau, E.; Du, Y.; Burchfiel, B.; Tedrake, R.; and Song, S. 2025. Diffusion Policy: Visuomo-tor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10–11): 1684–1704. Ferraro, S.; Mazzaglia, P.; Verbelen, T.; and Dhoedt, B. 2025. FOCUS: Object-Centric World Models for Robotic Manip-ulation. Frontiers in Neurorobotics , 19: 1585386. Goswami, R. G.; Krishnamurthy, P.; LeCun, Y.; and Khor-rami, F. 2026. Unifying Object-Centric World Models and Diffusion Policy: A Hierarchical Framework for Multi-Stage Robotic Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.08775 .Kirillov, A.; Mintun, E.; Ravi, N.; Mao, H.; Rolland, C.; Gustafson, L.; Xiao, T.; Whitehead, S.; Berg, A. C.; Lo, W.-Y.; Dollár, P.; and Girshick, R. 2023. Segment Anything. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 4015–4026. Kreber, J. U.; Mack, L.; and Stueckler, J. 2026. Learn-ing Action-Conditional and Object-Centric Gaussian Splat-ting World Models for Rigid Objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.01950 .Li, W.; Li, G.; Maeda, K.; Ogawa, T.; and Haseyama, M. 2026. Predictive but Not Plannable: RC-aux for Latent World Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.07278 .Liu, B.; Zhu, Y.; Gao, C.; Feng, Y.; Liu, Q.; Zhu, Y.; and Stone, P. 2023. LIBERO: Benchmarking Knowledge Trans-fer for Lifelong Robot Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 44776–44791. Liu, S.; Zeng, Z.; Ren, T.; Li, F.; Zhang, H.; Yang, J.; Jiang, Q.; Li, C.; Yang, J.; Su, H.; Zhu, J.; and Zhang, L. 2024. Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded Pre-Training for Open-Set Object Detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 38–55. Springer. Liu, Y.; Sun, P.; Li, S.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, L.; Chao, X.; Dong, S.; Chen, F.; Zhang, X.-P.; and Ding, W. 2026. OA-WAM: Object-Addressable World Action Model for Robust Robot Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06481 .Locatello, F.; Weissenborn, D.; Unterthiner, T.; Mahendran, A.; Heigold, G.; Uszkoreit, J.; Dosovitskiy, A.; and Kipf, T. 2020. Object-Centric Learning with Slot Attention. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 33, 11525–11538. Maes, L.; Le Lidec, Q.; Scieur, D.; LeCun, Y.; and Balestriero, R. 2026. LeWorldModel: Stable End-to-End Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture from Pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19312 .Pari, J.; Shafiullah, N. M.; Arunachalam, S. P.; and Pinto, L. 2021. The Surprising Effectiveness of Representation Learn-ing for Visual Imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01511 .Ravi, N.; Gabeur, V.; Hu, Y.-T.; Hu, R.; Ryali, C.; Ma, T.; Khedr, H.; Rädle, R.; Rolland, C.; Gustafson, L.; Mintun, E.; Pan, J.; Alwala, K. V.; Carion, N.; Wu, C.-Y.; Girshick, R.; Dollár, P.; and Feichtenhofer, C. 2025. SAM 2: Segment Anything in Images and Videos. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Spieler, J.; Villar-Corrales, A.; and Behnke, S. 2026. Slot-MPC: Goal-Conditioned Model Predictive Control with Object-Centric Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.14937 .Yu, H.; Lin, H.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, W.; Gu, C.; Li, H.; and Tan, P. 2026. MaskWAM: Unifying Mask Prompting and Prediction for World-Action Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.13515 .Zhou, G.; Pan, H.; LeCun, Y.; and Pinto, L. 2024. DINO-WM: World Models on Pre-Trained Visual Features Enable Zero-Shot Planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04983 .Zhu, Y.; Joshi, A.; Stone, P.; and Zhu, Y. 2023. VIOLA: Imitation Learning for Vision-Based Manipulation with Ob-ject Proposal Priors. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 1199–1210. PMLR. A Conceptual Clarification 

This appendix expands the conceptual distinction between entity hypotheses and task-conditioned predictive state, then provides the complete model, training, label-construction, evaluation, and deployment specifications supporting the main paper. Numerical values reproduced below are copied from the main-paper tables. 

A.1 Entity Hypotheses, Role Binding, and Predictive State 

At the perception level, SR-WM represents a scene as an ex-changeable set of entity hypotheses Et = {et,n }Nn=1 . These hypotheses summarize appearance, geometry, motion, and confidence without assigning a task function. Role binding is the operation B(Et, ℓ, q t) that uses language and embod-iment context to construct the role-conditioned predictive state. Entity identity therefore differs from task role: the same hypothesis may ground the target under one instruction, the goal under another, or neither when it is a distractor. At control step t, the model receives V camera histories 

O≤t = {Iv

> ≤t

}Vv=1 , proprioception q≤t, and instruction ℓ. The resulting task-conditioned predictive state is 

Zt = B(Et, ℓ, q t) = 

n

zgrip  

> t

, z tgt  

> t

, z goal  

> t

, z rel  

> t

, z phase 

> t

o

.

(S1) These are five state components, not five object roles. Grip-per, target, and goal ground embodiment and task entities; relation represents interaction state; and phase represents temporal progress. The FM head samples K action chunks 

Akt of horizon H, and the action-conditioned model predicts 

J sub-horizon state transitions for each chunk. 

A.2 Why SR-WM Is Not “Slots + a Language Head” 

A conventional language-conditioned slot model follows image → exchangeable entity slots 

→ language-conditioned readout .

Language can contextualize the set, but the exchangeable entities remain the world model interface. SR-WM instead follows image → Et → Zt

→ { future state , actions ,

planning signals },

where Et contains task-agnostic entity hypotheses and Zt =

B(Et, ℓ, q t) is the role-conditioned predictive state. The role state replaces the exchangeable entity set as the predic-tive interface of SR-WM. Role binding is therefore not a post-hoc semantic classifier. The constructed state directly determines (i) the conditioning space of FM action gener-ation, (ii) the state space advanced by action-conditioned dynamics, (iii) the target space of semantic transition pre-diction, and (iv) the evidence used by the selector and suffix repair. Main Table 5 provides the direct state-composition con-trol. Instance slots encode entity identity; slots plus instruc-tion add global context; target–goal binding introduces ex-plicit entity grounding; relation adds interaction state; and phase adds temporal progress. Language alone is useful but does not construct these task-relevant state variables. Main Table 1 provides complementary evidence: Candidate 0 and Oracle@4 improve before semantic selection, showing that the state changes action generation and feasible-candidate coverage rather than only post-hoc ranking. Table 5 evaluates the complete role-state design, includ-ing structured variables and their predictive supervision. A fully factorial separation between state parameterization and supervision is beyond the scope of this work. 

A.3 Experimental Claim Boundaries 

Table S3 links each main-paper question to its direct evi-dence and empirical reading. The scope column records the matched comparison under which that reading applies. 

# B Model Specification 

B.1 Patch and Entity Tokens 

The retained LeWM visual encoder produces patch features 

xvt,i . Each feature is augmented with normalized image co-ordinates, camera identity, and temporal feature differences. Learned entity queries iteratively cross-attend to all views and return 

et,n = f app  

> t,n

, g geom  

> t,n

, m motion  

> t,n

, c conf 

> t,n

 . (S2) The appearance term summarizes visual evidence; geom-etry stores image-space or calibrated ray/depth cues; mo-tion stores temporal displacement; and confidence indicates whether the query is visually supported. Temporal consis-tency is encouraged through appearance and motion similar-ity, while entity ordering is not treated as persistent identity. Symbol Shape Meaning Use                                 

> XtV T oP×dMulti-view patch tokens over observation history To
> Soft entity extraction and optional proposal bias
> EtN×deNsoft entity hypotheses with appearance, geometry, motion, and confidence Task-conditioned role binding
> Zt5×dFive task-conditioned state components Predictive interface for FM generation, se-mantic dynamics, and selection
> AktH×daCandidate action chunk kClosed-loop execution or repair
> bZkt,j 5×dfor each jPredicted task-conditioned state at sub-horizon boundary j
> Transition supervision and violation local-ization
> bYkt,j task-dependent Contact, grasp, predicates, preservation, phase, and fixture state Semantic scoring and diagnostics

Table S1: Symbolic tensor interface. Numerical dimensions are intentionally kept symbolic because they are not needed to interpret the reported comparisons; exact dimensions are checkpoint metadata in the artifact.                    

> Property Slots + language SR-WM
> Perception Exchangeable en-tity slots Exchangeable entity hypotheses Language use Global con-text/readout Entity–role binding Predictive interface Entity set Task-conditioned state Zt
> Action generation Generic slot con-text FM conditioned on
> Zt
> Dynamics Generic future fea-tures Action-conditioned state transitions Planning Scalar/readout Establish, preserve, phase, fixture, repair

Table S2: Operational distinction between global language conditioning over exchangeable entities and SR-WM’s task-conditioned predictive interface. SR-WM is not a tracking system: association is limited to the finite observation history and does not assume identity through complete occlusion or re-entry. A query need not correspond exactly to one segmentation mask, and an uncer-tain object may distribute evidence over several patches or queries. 

B.2 Optional Segmentation Prior 

When proposals are available, Grounding-DINO boxes may prompt SAM/SAM2 to produce proposal-to-patch affinities 

Mn,i . They enter only as an additive attention bias: 

αn,i = softmax i

 q⊤ 

> n

ki

√d + λseg Mn,i 



. (S3) The unmasked patch tokens are always retained. During training, three independent dropout operations remove the complete proposal set, individual proposals, or the bias co-efficient. At inference, λseg = 0 produces the patch-only model. Proposal indices are not treated as persistent object addresses, preventing proposal ordering from becoming an implicit state representation. 

B.3 Task-Conditioned Role-State Construction 

For state component r, a language- and state-conditioned query attends to the entity hypotheses: 

br,n = softmax n

 qr (ℓ, q t)⊤k(et,n )

√d + u⊤ 

> r

gt,n 



,zr 

> t

= X

> n

br,n v(et,n ). (S4) The five state queries are non-exchangeable. The grip-per query includes proprioception; target and goal queries emphasize instruction tokens; relation is synthesized from target–goal and gripper–target interaction features; and phase aggregates state history. Relation and phase are state compo-nents rather than object roles. The same entity may therefore become target, goal, or distractor under different instructions without changing the entity encoder. 

B.4 Training Supervision and Rollout Information 

Task specifications, simulator predicates, collision state, articulated-joint state, and annotations supervise predictive targets during training. This is training-time supervision, not an inference-time state input. During deployment, SR-WM only requires RGB observations, proprioception, and lan-guage instructions. The information boundary is summarized in Table S5. Main Table 3 evaluates learned-state prediction under patch-only and corrupted proposal conditions. Binding, rela-tion, and phase metrics compare model outputs with held-out annotations; these annotations are evaluation targets rather than online inputs. Runs that consume ground-truth task-state context, predicates, or masks at rollout are labeled oracle-context and reported separately from deployable compar-isons. 

B.5 Action-Conditioned State Dynamics 

The action encoder divides each chunk into J ordered seg-ments and returns tokens Ea(Akt,j ). A state transformer alternates inter-component self-attention and action cross-Question Direct evidence Empirical reading Scope 

Does state structure affect generation? Main Table 1, Candi-date 0 and Oracle@4 The complete predictive-state generator im-proves nominal success and sampled coverage relative to the monolithic-latent generator Complete-system comparison at matched K and rollout seeds Does language alone ex-plain the gain? Main Table 5 Global instruction context improves slots, while explicit grounding, interaction state, and progress yield further gains Complete state design with matched predictive supervision Are predictions action-sensitive? Main Table 4 Hard negatives and transition losses improve pairwise action discrimination Registered positive/negative construction and score metric Are masks required at in-ference? Main Table 3 Patch-only and corrupted-prior variants remain operational without oracle masks Evaluated LIBERO suites and named prior conditions Does the state support transfer? Main Table 6 Source pretraining improves target-data adapta-tion on Goal, LIBERO-10, and jointly pretrained held-out tasks; Spatial remains comparable Matched target data and adap-tation updates What is the complete-system cost? Main Table 7 The SR-WM + FM system has 45.4M parameters with the reported memory and latency Reported hardware, precision, batch, and warm-up protocol 

Table S3: Experimental claim boundaries for the main paper. Oracle@4 measures sampled coverage; selector performance is reported by selected top-1 success. 

Component Inputs emphasized State represented Direct supervision 

Gripper Proprioception, gripper-region patches End-effector pose, aperture, motion, contact, grasp Pose/aperture targets; contact and grasp labels Target Instruction and candidate object en-tities Task-relevant object or articulated part Target identity, footprint, center, or part label Goal Instruction and receptacle/fixture en-tities Destination region or desired fixture state Goal identity, region, or terminal-state label Relation Gripper–target and target–goal fea-tures Relative geometry and symbolic predi-cates Predicate establishment and preser-vation Phase Temporal history of all state compo-nents Approach, grasp, transport, align, re-lease, complete Phase class and valid-transition la-bel 

Table S4: Inputs, semantics, and training supervision for the five predictive state components. Simulator state and task-derived labels supervise targets; they are not rollout inputs. attention. At each boundary, 

∆zr,k j = Drθ

 Zkt,j −1, E a(Akt,j ), ℓ  ,

bzr,k t,j = zr,k t,j −1 + σ(gr,k j ) ⊙ ∆zr,k j . (S5) The residual gate can remain near zero for components un-affected by a local action. Intermediate states, rather than only the endpoint, allow the selector to identify the first con-tact, predicate, preservation, fixture, or phase violation and provide the boundary used by suffix repair. 

# C Training Objectives 

The objective contains eleven named losses. Label masks exclude transitions for which a signal is undefined; they must not be converted into negative labels. Future state-component targets ¯zrt,j are obtained from the target encoder on the ob-served future and are stop-gradient targets. 

C.1 Representation and State-Construction Losses 

1. Retained LeWM objective. We retain the baseline la-tent prediction and anti-collapse regularizer: 

LLeWM = Llatent -pred + λSIG LSIGReg . (S6) 

2. Role binding loss. Available role footprints or identity distributions ¯br supervise attention. Geometry targets are included inside the same named term: 

Lrole = X

> r

mr

CE( ¯br , b r ) + βgeo SmoothL1(¯ gr , g r ) .

(S7) For distributed goal regions, ¯br is soft and entropy regular-ization prevents collapse without forcing a single patch. 

3. State dynamics loss. 

Ldyn = X

> r,j

mr,j 

1 − cos  bzrt,j , sg(¯ zrt,j )

+ βdyn SmoothL1  bzrt,j , sg(¯ zrt,j )  .

(S8) The cosine term preserves component semantics while SmoothL1 retains task-relevant metric geometry. 

C.2 Semantic Transition Losses 

4. Contact and grasp loss. 

Lcontact = X

> j

mcj

 BCE( bycontact  

> j

, y contact  

> j

)+ BCE( bygrasp  

> j

, y grasp  

> j

).

(S9) Signal Train input/target Rollout input Oracle only Scope 

RGB history, instruction, pro-prioception Yes Yes No Common deployable observation interface Expert actions and observed fu-ture frames Target No No FM and predictive-state supervision Target/goal identity, footprint, center, part ID Target No No Role-binding supervision from task specifi-cation or annotation Contact, native predicates, fix-ture joints, phase Target No No Semantic-transition supervision from simu-lator state Soft proposal prior (Grounding DINO + SAM/SAM2) Optional Optional No Used only in explicitly labeled prior condi-tions Oracle segmentation masks as model input Diagnostic variant No Yes Perceptual-headroom condition in main Ta-ble 3; distinct from training footprints Held-out test outcome No No Evaluation Never available to the selector when choos-ing a candidate 

Table S5: Information-access audit. “Target” denotes training-only supervision, not a model input. The patch-only condition consumes no segmentation proposal at rollout time. 

5. Predicate-establishment loss. 

Lpredicate = X

> p,j

mep,j BCE( byestablish  

> p,j

, y establish  

> p,j

)+ β∧Lconjunction .

(S10) 

6. Relation-preservation loss. For predicates already true at the previous boundary, 

Lpreserve = X

> p,j

mpp,j BCE( bypreserve  

> p,j

, y preserve  

> p,j

). (S11) This term distinguishes making new progress from undoing a prerequisite. 

7. Phase loss. 

Lphase = X

> j

mϕj

h

CE( bϕj , ϕ j ) + βtr BCE( bvϕj , v ϕj )

i

,

(S12) where vϕj marks whether the transition from the previous phase is valid. 

8. Fixture-state loss. 

Lfixture = X

> f,j

mff,j 

 BCE( bydisc  

> f,j

, y disc  

> f,j

)+ βf SmoothL1( bycont  

> f,j

, y cont  

> f,j

).

(S13) The discrete target captures states such as acti-vated/deactivated or open/closed; the continuous target cap-tures articulated-joint displacement or angle. 

C.3 Action and Decision Losses 

9. Flow-matching action loss. For expert action A+, Gaus-sian noise ϵ, and Aτ = τ A + + (1 − τ )ϵ,

Lact = Eτ,ϵ vψ (Aτ , τ | Zt, ℓ ) − (A+ − ϵ) 22 . (S14) 

10. Hard-negative ranking loss. 

Lshuf = max  0, m − Sω (Zt, A + 

> t

) + Sω (Zt, A − 

> t

) .

(S15) Negatives preserve the current observation and task while shuffling temporal segments, reversing approach–grasp or-der, substituting another trajectory, or perturbing release tim-ing. 

11. Suffix inpainting loss. For a sampled repair boundary 

j⋆, let Mj⋆ be zero on the retained prefix and one on the suffix: 

Lsuffix = E Mj⋆ ⊙ vψ (Aτ , τ | Zt, ℓ ) − (A+ − ϵ) 22 .

(S16) During ODE integration, the prefix coordinates are reset to their anchored values after every solver step. 

C.4 Grouped Objective 

The three groups used in the main paper expand to 

Lrep = λLeWM LLeWM + λrole Lrole + λdyn Ldyn ,

Lsem = λcontact Lcontact + λpred Lpredicate + λpres Lpreserve 

+ λphase Lphase + λfixture Lfixture ,

Lpolicy = λact Lact + λshuf Lshuf + λrepair Lsuffix ,

L = Lrep + Lsem + Lpolicy . (S17) 

# D Label Construction 

D.1 Canonical Predicate Interface 

Every task is converted to a canonical predicate graph con-taining object arguments, fixture arguments, desired truth values, and conjunction structure. The parser reads native task/XML predicates and simulator state. It does not infer fix-ture semantics from task-name substrings. An unsupported predicate is reported as an explicit parser error and its loss mask is zero; it is never silently assigned a negative label. Loss Prediction target Label source Primary failure prevented 

LLeWM Future latent feature Future observation Predictive collapse 

Lrole Binding identity/geometry Task spec., simulator, annotation Wrong target or goal binding 

Ldyn Future predictive state Future encoded states Action-insensitive state 

Lcontact Contact and stable grasp Collision, aperture, relative motion False grasp progress 

Lpredicate Establishment/conjunction Native task predicates Partial or wrong completion 

Lpreserve Previously true predicates re-main true Predicate history Undoing completed subgoals 

Lphase Phase and transition validity Event-driven phase parser Invalid action ordering 

Lfixture Fixture class and joint state Native articulated state Stove/drawer/microwave errors 

Lact Expert action flow Demonstration actions Weak action generation 

Lshuf Positive above hard negative Constructed action pairs Static-state shortcut 

Lsuffix Valid suffix conditioned on pre-fix Masked demonstrations/repairs Destructive full replanning 

Table S6: The eleven granular training losses and their functions. 

Signal Source Construction Ambiguity handling 

Contact Collision/contact state Positive when gripper and target have valid contact Mask invalid simulator contacts Stable grasp Contact, aperture, relative motion Contact persists while target follows gripper over a temporal window Mask transient contact Predicate established Native predicate evaluator Required predicate changes from false to true Use task argument binding Predicate preserved Predicate history Predicate true at prior boundary remains true Defined only after estab-lishment Conjunction Task predicate graph All currently required predicate leaves are true Preserve individual leaf la-bels Phase Event-driven finite-state parser Approach, grasp, transport, align, release, complete Mask boundary-transition frames Drawer state Articulated joint displacement Continuous displacement plus task-specific open/closed state Use native joint and thresh-old Microwave state Door joint angle Continuous angle plus open/closed state Do not parse from task name Stove state Native activation/knob state Discrete requested burner state Bind the referenced fixture part 

Table S7: Semantic-label sources and construction rules. 

D.2 Phase Construction 

The phase parser uses events rather than fixed temporal bins. A typical pick-and-place trace progresses through: (i) ap-proach before valid target contact; (ii) grasp after stable grasp is established; (iii) transport while the grasp is preserved and the target moves toward the goal; (iv) align when the target is near the goal but the terminal predicate is not yet satisfied; (v) release while the target–goal predicate is established and the gripper opens; and (vi) complete after all required predicates remain true for a verification window. Fixture tasks replace irrelevant phases with interaction and state-transition events. Frames that admit multiple phase interpretations are ignored by the phase loss rather than assigned arbitrarily. 

D.3 Preservation and Counterfactual Labels 

For each boundary, the active preservation set contains pred-icates established at or before the previous boundary. A can-didate that establishes a new predicate but violates any ac-tive prerequisite receives positive establishment and negative preservation labels. Hard-negative chunks inherit the same current state and goal as the positive chunk; only action order or action identity is changed. This construction prevents the selector from using a promising initial state as a shortcut. 

# E Evaluation Protocol 

E.1 Training and Checkpoint Selection 

Data Pools and Dynamic Resampling. Training uses three provenance-preserving pools: 1. Expert windows , sampled from deduplicated demonstra-tions; 2. Rollout deviations , containing states reached after model errors or off-demonstration prefixes; and 3. Repair windows , containing a valid prefix, a detected violation boundary, and a corrective suffix. Transition-positive windows are stratified by task, predicate, phase, and fixture event. Duplicate positive segments are capped per epoch so that rare grasp, release, and fixture transitions are not overwhelmed by repeated static frames. Algorithm S1 Stage-aware training with checkpoint accep-tance 

Require: Expert pool Dexp , deviation pool Ddev , repair pool 

Drep  

> 1:

for epoch e = 1 , . . . , E do  

> 2:

Deduplicate and stratify expert windows by task, pred-icate, and phase  

> 3:

Apply the per-epoch cap to repeated positive transi-tions  

> 4:

Mix pools using the scheduled ratios 

ρexp (e), ρ dev (e), ρ rep (e) 

> 5:

for each minibatch do  

> 6:

Randomly drop proposal sets, masks, and segmen-tation bias  

> 7:

Encode entity hypotheses and construct the predic-tive state  

> 8:

Draw positive chunks and matched hard negatives  

> 9:

Compute the eleven losses in Equation S17  

> 10:

Update all currently trainable modules  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Evaluate held-out semantic metrics and shuffled-action margin  

> 13:

Run the pre-registered short closed-loop validation set  

> 14:

if shuffle margin passes the threshold then  

> 15:

Mark checkpoint eligible; rank eligible checkpoints by validation rollout success  

> 16:

else  

> 17:

Retain checkpoint only for diagnostics  

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for Ensure: Best eligible checkpoint selected without test roll-outs Pool membership and source trajectory are logged for every minibatch. 

Acceptance Criteria. A checkpoint is not eligible for de-ployment merely because its training loss is low. It must (i) separate positive and shuffled/reversed actions by a pre-registered score margin; (ii) avoid catastrophic degradation in role binding, relation AUROC, and phase F1; and (iii) improve or match short closed-loop validation success under a fixed task set and seed list. Test rollouts are never used to choose the epoch, selector threshold, repair budget, or fixed candidate identity. Exact token widths, horizon, optimizer schedule, loss weights, sampling ratios, and selector thresholds are imple-mentation metadata rather than free choices made during test evaluation. They must be read from the released checkpoint and frozen run configuration; this document deliberately does not invent values absent from the authoritative manuscript. 

E.2 Closed-Loop Inference 

Stage-Aware Candidate Scoring. For candidate k, the selector consumes the current and predicted phases, con-tact/grasp confidence, predicate establishment, preservation,               

> Setting reported in the main pa-per Value
> LeWM encoder–predictor refer-ence 15.0M parameters Complete SR-WM + FM system 45.4M parameters Predictive state components 5Primary candidate count K= 4
> Candidate-count sweep K∈ { 1,2,4,8}
> Efficiency training batch 32 Efficiency hardware / precision A100-40GB / BF16 Latency warm-up / repetitions 100 replans / 5 runs

Table S8: Configuration values explicitly reported by the main paper. The 15M number refers to the retained LeWM encoder–predictor, not the complete 45.4M-parameter sys-tem. fixture validity, and uncertainty: 

Skω = MLP ω

zphase  

> t

, \zphase kt+H , bpk

> contact

, bpk

> establish

,

bpk

> preserve

, bpk

> fixture

, u k

. (S18) The stage context changes how the same displacement is in-terpreted. Contact may be desirable during grasp but insuf-ficient during transport; opening the gripper may be invalid during transport but required during release. 

Violation-Aware Suffix Repair. Let j⋆ be the earliest boundary with an invalid phase transition, contact/grasp fail-ure, predicate violation, preservation failure, or invalid fix-ture state. Selective repair retains Ak⋆ 

> 1: j⋆−1

and samples only 

Ak⋆ 

> j⋆:H

. Full resampling discards the complete chunk and is reported as a separate baseline. Both methods must be com-pared under a matched generation-call budget. 

Candidate Accounting. Candidate 0 measures the uns-elected action prior. Random@ K samples one of the same candidates uniformly. Best fixed ID chooses one noise-stream position on validation data and keeps that position fixed at test time; it is a calibration baseline rather than evidence that candidate indices have intrinsic meaning. Oracle@ K asks whether any of the K sampled candidates succeeds and is never described as selector performance. The candidates use independent FM noise but share model weights and con-text, so they are not assumed to be statistically independent Bernoulli trials. Suffix repair and full resampling report all additional model calls and use the same maximum call bud-get. 

E.3 LIBERO Evaluation 

LIBERO Splits and Rollout Matching. LIBERO-Object, LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Goal, and LIBERO-10 are evalu-ated separately. Task, demonstration, validation-rollout, and test-rollout splits are frozen before checkpoint selection. Within a fixed generator, decision-rule comparisons use the same initial states, generated candidates, and environment seeds; only the decision rule changes. Across different gen-erators, initial states, environment seeds, candidate count, and FM noise seeds are matched, but the resulting action Algorithm S2 Closed-loop selection and suffix repair 

Require: Observation history, proprioception, instruction, candidate count K 

> 1:

Encode Zt 

> 2:

Sample {Akt }Kk=1 from independent FM noise  

> 3:

for k = 1 , . . . , K do  

> 4:

Predict bZ kt, 1: J and semantic transitions  

> 5:

Compute score Skω and earliest violation jk 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

k⋆ ← arg max k Skω 

> 8:

if Sk⋆ 

> ω

≥ η and no violation is predicted then  

> 9:

Send the permitted receding-horizon prefix to the safety layer  

> 10:

else  

> 11:

j⋆ ← jk⋆ 

> 12:

Pin Ak⋆ 

> 1: j⋆−1

and sample a new suffix  

> 13:

Re-run semantic rollout and scoring on the repaired chunk  

> 14:

if the repaired chunk fails acceptance then  

> 15:

Return safe stop or the registered fallback; do not bypass safety limits  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

Execute only the registered number of steps, then re-observe and replan chunks necessarily differ. Consequently, a generator com-parison cannot be interpreted as a selector-only comparison. For cross-suite evaluation, an Object-trained model is evaluated zero-shot, adapted with a fixed amount of target-suite data, or compared with training from scratch under the same target data and update count. This controls target-suite data and adaptation updates, not total historical data or pretraining compute: the adapted model has source-suite pretraining by design. The supported conclusion is therefore suite-dependent target-data efficiency, with gains on Goal, LIBERO-10, and jointly pretrained held-out tasks, rather than equal-total-compute superiority or a gain on every transfer pair. Joint-to-held-out evaluation freezes the held-out task list before joint training. 

Primary Metrics. For rollout outcome yk ∈ { 0, 1},

Candidate0 = y0,

Oracle@ K = max  

> k≤K

yk,

Selected@ K = yk⋆ ,

Regret@ K = Oracle@ K − Selected@ K. (S19) Metrics are averaged over the registered tasks, initial states, and independent seeds. Regret is reported in percentage points after averaging. For positive/negative action pair i,

RankAcc = 1

Npair 

X

> i

⊮ S(A+ 

> i

) > S (A− 

> i

) ,

ShuffleGap = 1

Npair 

X

> i

S(A+ 

> i

) − S(A− 

> i

) . (S20)                    

> Representation package Added struc-ture Success (%)
> Five instance slots Entity iden-tity
> 55 .0±3.6
> Instance slots + instruction Global task context
> 62 .0±3.3
> Target + goal binding Entity–role grounding
> 68 .0±3.1
> Target + goal + relation state Interaction state
> 73 .0±2.9
> Full SR-WM state Gripper and temporal phase
> 83 .0±2.4

Table S9: Progressive predictive-state construction repro-duced from main Table 5. Language supplies context; grounding, interaction state, and progress construct task vari-ables used by dynamics and planning. Binding accuracy uses the task-defined target/goal identity; relation AUROC is computed over valid predicate labels; and phase F1 is macro-averaged over valid phase frames. Undefined labels are masked before metric aggregation. 

Candidate Diversity. Candidate diversity is measured af-ter normalizing action chunks with training statistics and computing pairwise distance over the full horizon. Near-duplicates below the registered threshold δdup are collapsed when reporting effective coverage. The main quantitative comparison uses K = 4 ; Oracle@4 is therefore interpreted as feasible-candidate coverage at that fixed budget. 

Representation Comparisons and Causal Scope. The main paper contains two complementary comparisons. Main Table 1 compares complete generator/state systems under a common candidate budget, measuring the system-level effect of replacing a monolithic latent or entity-slot interface with the task-conditioned predictive-state interface. Main Table 5 progressively constructs task variables. It begins with five exchangeable instance slots, adds global in-struction conditioning, then introduces target–goal ground-ing, relation state, gripper state, and temporal phase. Token width and the downstream FM/selector structure are held fixed; state construction and its matched supervision change. The measured values are: The slots-plus-instruction row controls for global language conditioning without entity–role grounding. The later rows add explicit predictive variables and their corresponding training targets. Under a matched candidate budget, the lad-der evaluates how progressively constructing the predictive state affects closed-loop success. 

Mask-Dependence Diagnostics. Patch-only, soft-prior, corrupted-prior, and oracle-mask variants use the same se-lector architecture and candidate budget. Oracle masks quan-tify perceptual headroom, while patch-only and corrupted-prior variants measure deployment without oracle segmen-tation. Main Table 3 reports operational performance under the named train/test prior conditions. Same-checkpoint cor-ruption studies record the corruption process and seed as separate diagnostics. 

Statistical Reporting. Paired comparisons use the same initial states and candidate sets whenever the generator is fixed. The unit of analysis is a rollout (grouped by task and initial state), rather than an individual control step. Aggre-gation manifests record the meaning of every ± term and the number of tasks, rollouts, and independent seeds. Hy-perparameters selected on validation are frozen before test rollouts. The hardware values in main Table 7 are mean ±

standard deviation over five runs. 

# F Additional Analysis 

F.1 Result Provenance 

The empirical values in this supplement reproduce main Ta-bles 1 and 3–7. Each numerical cell is linked to a manifest recording checkpoint hash, task split, initial states, environ-ment seeds, candidate-noise seeds, decision rule, repair-call budget, and aggregation unit. Quantitative rollout claims use the main K = 4 setting. The registered K ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8} sweep and effective-coverage statistics are retained in the artifact for candidate-budget analysis. Dynamic resampling, rollout deviations, and re-pair windows define the complete training curriculum; the paper evaluates their joint contribution through the reported end-to-end system. 

F.2 Failure Taxonomy and Qualitative Analysis 

The taxonomy below standardizes qualitative failure annota-tion. The earliest observable failure is the primary label and later consequences are secondary tags. The two qualitative limitations discussed in the main paper—severe perceptual occlusion and granular phase misalignment—map to the per-ception/binding and premature-release/phase categories be-low. For qualitative figures, each example should show the ini-tial observation, instruction, binding attention, four candidate summaries, predicted semantic events, selected candidate, first predicted violation, and repaired suffix. The qualitative set includes successes, selector and repair failures, and cases where Oracle@4 is zero. 

# G Physical-System Protocol 

This section defines the observation contract, validation se-quence, and safety gates for physical evaluation. Simulation and physical results are reported as separate evaluation set-tings. 

G.1 Observation and State Contract 

The robot-side RPC state message must contain synchronized camera frames, proprioception, end-effector pose, gripper state, and a monotonic timestamp. The online provider re-constructs the same ordered context used during training. It is reset at every episode boundary and never consumes ground-truth state components or predicate labels. Action representation, control frequency, history size, horizon, nor-malization fingerprint, and checkpoint identity are returned in server metadata and recorded in telemetry. 

G.2 Provider Validation 

Before actuation, recorded demonstrations are replayed chronologically through the online provider and compared with the raw training context. The comparison checks field or-dering, timestamp alignment, camera ordering, end-effector pose, gripper convention, and normalization. Every normal-ized dimension with |z| > 6 is inspected; such values are not automatically clipped away because they may reveal a state-contract error. 

G.3 Deployment Gates 

1. Offline replay: provider output matches stored contexts within registered tolerances. 2. Shadow execution: run at least 100 consecutive inference steps without sending commands; record latency, support checks, predicted actions, clipping, and fallback events. 3. Single-step canary: with an operator at the emer-gency stop, send one low-speed command under joint, workspace, and gripper limits. 4. Short closed loop: increase to a small registered step budget only after the canary passes. 5. Full evaluation: use reset-matched trials and never change limits, prompts, or checkpoints after inspecting test outcomes. An emergency stop complements but does not replace software safety constraints. A clipped first action, stale times-tamp, unsupported state, invalid normalization fingerprint, or failed actuation contract causes a safe stop. Target/workspace bounds must not be removed merely to obtain motion. 

# H Reproducibility Package 

The anonymous artifact package should contain: 1. exact model, optimizer, sampler, and evaluation configu-rations; 2. environment and dependency locks; 3. task/XML predicate-parser tests, including stove, drawer, and microwave fixtures; 4. immutable checkpoint manifests with parameter counts and hashes; 5. train/validation/test task lists and independent seed lists; 6. candidate-noise manifests for paired selector compar-isons; 7. scripts for Candidate 0, Random@ K, fixed ID, selector, Oracle@ K, full resampling, and suffix repair; 8. raw rollout outcomes and scripts that regenerate every table; 9. latency/memory measurement scripts with warm-up and hardware metadata; and 10. physical telemetry schemas and safety checklists if phys-ical results are reported. Generated tables should fail closed when expected runs are missing, duplicated, or selected from test outcomes. Each table cell should be traceable to a run manifest, checkpoint hash, task list, seed list, and aggregation script. Comparison Matched factors Jointly varied factors Supported reading 

Main Table 1 generators K, tasks, initial states, FM fam-ily Representation, supervision, pa-rameters, sampled actions Complete-system generation and cov-erage Main Table 1Candidate 0/ran-dom/fixed/selector Same SR-WM candidates and rollout states Selection rule Conversion of fixed coverage to top-1 success Main Table 5 state com-position Token interface and down-stream FM/selector State construction and matched predictive supervision Joint contribution of the predictive-state design Full resampling vs. suffix repair Base model and maximum generation-call budget Prefix pinning; realized latency Benefit of prefix-preserving repair at matched calls Main Table 3 mask con-ditions Selector architecture and K Perceptual prior and potentially its training condition Operational mask dependence under named conditions Adapted vs. scratch Target data, updates, test tasks Source pretraining data and com-pute Suite-dependent target-data adapta-tion comparison 

Table S10: Experimental controls and scope. Each row identifies matched factors, jointly varied factors, and the corresponding system-level reading. 

Result family Required provenance key Interpretation key 

Candidate 0 / Oracle@4 Generator checkpoint, K, FM noise, en-vironment seed Candidate 0 measures the prior; Oracle@4 measures sampled coverage Selector / repair Exact candidate set, selector check-point, extra call count Decision and repair changes are read under matched candidate/call budgets State composition Variant config, supervision masks, trainable parameter count Joint state-parameterization and predictive-supervision comparison Mask diagnostics Prior source, training condition, test-time condition Operational prior dependence; oracle masks quantify perceptual headroom Cross-suite transfer Source data, target data, updates, check-point selection Target-data adaptation after source pretraining Efficiency Full model graph, hardware, precision, warm-up, batch size 45.4M complete system; 15M retained-backbone refer-ence 

Table S11: Minimum provenance needed to regenerate and interpret the reported result families. 

# I Supplementary Limitations 

The five-component predictive-state interface assumes a sin-gle dominant gripper, target, and goal. Bimanual tasks, mul-tiple simultaneous targets, deformable objects, and tool use may require a variable-cardinality state graph. Simulator predicates, task specifications, and annotations provide train-ing targets; during deployment, SR-WM only requires RGB observations, proprioception, and language instructions. Ta-ble 5 evaluates the complete role-state design, including structured variables and their predictive supervision. Tempo-ral association is limited to the finite observation history, and entity ordering is not treated as persistent identity through occlusion or re-entry. Optional masks reduce dependence on a particular segmenter but do not eliminate occlusion or binding failures. A high Oracle@ K remains non-deployable when selection is weak, and suffix repair adds inference cost. Physical evaluation follows the independent deploy-ment gates in Section G. Category Operational definition Candidate diagnostic Relevant component 

Binding error Target or goal role attends to wrong en-tity/fixture part Low binding accuracy Binding loss and instruction grounding Approach error End effector fails to reach valid target con-tact Contact false; approach phase stalls FM generation and geome-try Grasp error Contact occurs but a stable grasp is never achieved or is subsequently lost Contact/grasp disagreement Contact head and preserva-tion Transport error Target departs gripper or moves away from goal Negative preservation or rela-tion transition State dynamics and selector Alignment error Target reaches goal vicinity but required predicate fails High geometry confidence, low establishment Relation state and predicate head Premature release Gripper opens before goal predicate is valid Invalid phase transition Phase head and hard nega-tives Fixture error Drawer, microwave, or stove state is misread or reversed Fixture-state prediction error Native predicate parser and fixture head Selector error A successful candidate exists but is not se-lected Oracle@ K = 1,Selected@ K = 0 

Semantic selector Repair error Valid prefix is altered or repaired suffix still violates Prefix drift or repeated viola-tion Masked FM and ODE pin-ning Perception error Occlusion/corruption removes task-relevant evidence Mask sensitivity and low con-fidence Patch entities and proposal dropout 

Table S12: Annotation taxonomy for qualitative failure analysis. Rollout counts and rates accompany any aggregate use of these categories. 

Gate Acceptance evidence 

Timestamp/camera sync Replay report under the robot’s reg-istered sensor tolerance Raw context agreement Stored-context versus online-provider field-level diff Normalized support No unexplained normalized dimen-sion with |z| > 6

Shadow stability At least 100 consecutive non-actuating inference steps Policy latency P50/P95/P99 latency satisfies the registered control deadline First-action clipping No unexplained clipping event in shadow/canary logs Single-step canary Joint, workspace, gripper, and expected-direction checks pass Emergency stop Operator checklist completed before motion 

Table S13: Physical deployment gates. Robot-specific nu-merical tolerances belong to the actuation contract and must be registered before data are inspected.